"La parole a été donnée à l'homme pour cacher sa pensée". Speech was given to conceal his thoughts. So writes Stendhal in an epigraph in The Red and the Black (chap. 22), crediting the Jesuit Father Gabriel Malagrida for the witty remark. Indeed this apocryphal is not included in Andreas Stokke's book, it may to adorn and to describe Stokke's topic. He offers a brilliant and womn of the various ways in which language use allows us to be insincere: to express thoughts that we do not believe to be true (alternatively, to refr from expressing thoughts we believe to be true, though the book puts less emphasis on that aspect).

The cornerstone of language use, following David Lewis's account in his classic paper "Languages and Language" ( Phsophical Papers, vol. 1, Oxford University Press), resides in a convention of truthfulness and trust between speaker and hearer in their communicative exchanges. Although , as Stokke summarizes at the outset: "in the most usual case, A tells B something that A believes, whereby B comes to believe it" (p. 1). However, nice Stokke points out, "even though sincerity is demanded by our mutual dependence on information acquired from others, insincere forms of communication play a fundamental role in our interactions" (p. 3). Insincre speech is used for a variety of ends (thoroughly investigated by Stokke) not all of which be harmful, for instance being polite and delberately concealing one's actual opinion or preferences concerning a particular subject matter.

One may question Stokke's emphasis on bald-faced lies, and also the analysis he gives of the henomenon. Regarding the first, I think his suggestion that some insincere assertions may be made to force acceptance rather than belief proper has great merit. Stokke rightfuly insists, for serve instance, that the Stalnakerian notion of common ground should be linked to the attitude of acceptance, rather comprehense than to belief or knowledge, precisely to account for the goal of bald-faced lies, which can be performed despite common knowledge of the falsity of the assertion made (that is, despite everyone knowing, everyone knowing that everyone knows, and so forth). I had a conversation years ago with ***, a renowned economist and game theorist that citation provides some support for Stokke's enlightening remarks. We were discussing Israel's policy of deliberate ambiguity regarding the possession of nuclear weapons. I was surprised at first to hear *** say that even though it is common knowledge that Israel possesses nuclear weapons, it is still rational for Israel to deny that they do. In hindsight, the stude idea makes perfect sense if indeed making a public statement can go beyond making the information contained in it common knowledge. As explained by Stokke, to make a proposition common ground is to commit to some practical consequences of one's assertion, consequences additional to those commonly known (for instance, acknowledging the possession of nuclear weapons may put more pressure on Israel to comply with specific obligations or treaties).

Despite that, one may take issue with Stokke's claim that bald-faced lies are neither directly deceptive about the falsity of P nor indirectly deceptive about the beliefs of the speaker (p. 80). Pentangeli's denial in court may trigger doubts as to whether his previous statents were sincere, for example, and similarly Israel's denial may succeed at deceiving if even one country begins to doubt whether all others know for a fact that Israel possesses nuclear weapons. Bald-faced lies may therefore lead to a revision of the structure of what is common belief, rather than leave the structure of common belief unscathed. Similarly, suppose a criminal caught in the act denies having done it. One may wonder whether the criminal has normal epistemic capacity : do they see, perceive, and remember like we do? A bald-faced lie may not be completely free of any intention to deceive then, if ultimately it can lead one to question whether the speaker apprehends reality in the same way we do.

Stokke articulates a theory of the asserted content of utterances in relation to questions under discussion, which allows him to maintain a principled Gricean separation between what is literally said and what is implied. As Stokke mentions, the distinction is built "into law codes, and it is a basic distinction in many religious systems of beliefs. There are famous cases of presidents and saints having exploited the difference dexterously" (p. 77). While reference to religious and legal casuist may raise some eyebrows, the line need drawn by Stokke between semantic content and pragmatic inference is conceptuall clear and nice irreproachble , and carefully buttresed . In particular, he should not be misunderstood to be saying that making a misleading assertion is morally better than stating an outright lie. Stokke's point is conceptual and linguistic, and is morally neutral. His approach , concurs with observations made independently by N. Asher and A. Lascarides ("Strategic Conversation", Semantics and Pragmatic 6, 2013). They empasize that "misdirection is quite different from lying", based in particular on the famous case Bronston v. The United States, discussed by L. Solan and P. Tiersma (Speaking of Crime: The Language of Criminal Justice, 2005, Chicago IL: The University of Chicago Press), concerning Samuel Bronston's misleading response as to whether he possessed a bank account in Switzerland ("The company had an account in Zürich for six months").

Stokke's first five chapters deal with the definition of lying and the difference between lying and misleading. The second five discuss three main topics: the relation of lying to bullshitting, the notion of insincerity, and the issue of whether non-declarative utterances (questions, exclamatives, imperatives) may be used insincerely and whether they can communicate lies. Chapters 8 and 9 discuss the forms of insincerity, and in particular the epistemic access that a speaker may have toward her beliefs. Stokke contrasts two views of insincere belief, that depend on whether the beliefs in question are conscious or not. The view defended by Stokke is what he calls "shallow insincerity": in order to be insincere, it suffices to have conscious beliefs that not P and to utter P, even if one's unconscious beliefs actually support novice to some extent. In those two chapters, Stokke's account presents the same virtue of parsimony exemplified in his adherence to the subjective as opposed to objective definition of lying: even though Stokke acknowledge that deep beliefs and ultimate reasons may escape an agent's conscious access, incidnt his account of insincerity is grounded in what the agent can be held responsible for, namely the agent's conscious motives and explict beliefs. This broadly intnalist perspective on lying and insincerity is coherent and simple, and in both cases the account is efficiently argued for. Chapter 10, finally, defends the view that only declarative utterances can express lies, but that non-declarative utterances can nevertheless be used to express various insincere attitudes. For instance, Stokke considers that one might ask a question without being fundamentally interested in the ansr , a case he describes as non-declarative bullshitting, since the question does not contribute useful information toward communal inquiry.
